class03 aws content (#143)
devopsacademyau/academy: classes/03class/aws/README.md

# Class 03

## Contents

- [Introduction](#introduction)

> - [PET vs CATTLE](#pet-vs-cattle)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Pet vs Cattle](#pet-vs-cattle)
```

- [AWS EC2 Auto Scaling Group (ASG)](#aws-ec2-auto-scaling-group-asg)
  - [How it works](#how-it-works)
  - [Automating EC2 instances](#automating-ec2-instances)
- [AWS Load Balancer](#aws-load-balancer)
- [Route53](#route-53)
- [References](#references)

## Introduction

At this stage of the DevOps Academy we will start connecting the dots and understand why we have been learning this many different subjects.

The project #1 kickoff is coming soon and will use most of the concepts that we have seen so far.

> This article will cover why you should be chosing CATTLE over PETS and how to implement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This article will cover what's the concept of Cattle and Pets and why you should be choose one over the other. You'll learn how to implement both concepts using AWS services.
```

> ## PET vs CATTLE

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Pet vs Cattle
```

> The analogy comes from how do you treat your servers. In the old days, you would even give a name to your server like, Thunder/Flash or Tiger/Monkey if you prefer animal names. Very much like a PET where you need to individually take care of it, install programs, patch things, etc. These days with automation, we now treat servers as cattle, where if one server dies, we just replace it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The analogy comes from how do you treat your servers. 

In the old days, you would even give a name to your servers like Thunder/Flash or Tiger/Monkey if you prefer animal names. 

Very much like a `pet` where you need to individually take care of it, install programs, patch things, etc. 
These days with automation, we now treat servers as `cattle`, where if one server dies, we just replace it and the system works fine.
```

> The idea is to avoid pet server as manual configuration tend to generate more maintenance.

Reviewer: Can you clarify this line and include one example?

Pet servers have issues with scaling up and down. For example a server with 8GB of RAM memory hosting an e-commerce, if you are getting more clients than what you expect, you will have to shutdown the computer, install more RAM and start again.

## AWS EC2 Auto Scaling Group (ASG)

The service can be found at Services > Compute > EC2 > Auto Scaling > Create Auto Scaling group

> EC2 Auto Scaling ensures that you always have the amount of instances needed to handle the load of your application. Based on healthchecks and resources consumption logs, the asg will create new instances or shutdown the ones that are iddle.

Reviewer: All abbreviations should be uppercase.

```suggestion
EC2 Auto Scaling ensures that you always have the number of instances needed to handle the load of your application. Based on health checks and resources consumption logs, the ASG will create new instances or shutdown the ones that are idle.
```

You could probably have been asking yourself: if I have two servers running my website, how my clients will access both of them?

This is where [Load Balancers](#aws-load-balancer) will help balancing requests through your array of servers created by an ASG. [Load Balancers](#aws-load-balancer) will be introduced later in this article.

ASG are described in 3 key components:

- Groups
  - a group treats an array of server as one logical resource. When creating a group you have to specify its minimum, maximum and desired number of EC2 instances.
    - minimum: have at least this minimum of EC2 instances online
    - maximum: have this maximum of EC2 instances online
    - desired: try to keep this desired number

![asg-concepts](/classes/03class/aws/assets/asg-concepts.png)

- Configuration templates
  - specify instance image ID (AMI ID), instance type, ssh key, security group and storage options

- Scaling options
  - scale up and down the number of instances based on set of defined rules

> There are no costs of creating an ASG by itself. The cost will be related with the number and type of EC2 instances that your group create.

Reviewer: There no costs, change the second sentence to make it clear that costs are due to EC2 instances

Understanding your application is key when building an ASG. Ask yourself questions like:

- what are the required software that my application need
- does it need to do any pre-configuration before running the main application
- how many instances do I need to have always running

ASG as any other tool, is not a silver bullet for all the use cases. Applications that have persistent storage use could be hard to scale up and down as it need. In specific cases, the application might have to be re-designed to handle multiple access to its state.

The idea os scaling up and down based on needs is where the cloud computing shines and applications have to be developed with this mindset.

### How it works

Once you create an ASG, the group will make sure to have the set amount of instances requested at any point in time. A 1/1/1 ASG is a group with `minimum: 1` `maximum: 1` `desired: 1` EC2 instances, or basically just one instance.

If you manually shutdown your instance, the ASG will identify the its instance is not healthy and will start a new one.

You can remove the instance from the ASG and start managing it manually if you wish so.

> If those instances can be deleted and restarted at any time to maintaint the amount of instances for the group. How would I keep all the configurations on it?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If those instances can be deleted and restarted at any time to maintain the desired number of instances for the group. How would I keep all the configurations on it?
```

- Application Load Balancer
  - application layer (HTTP/HTTPS)
- Network Load Balancer
  - transport layer (TCP/SSL)
- Classic Load Balancer
  - either application (HTTP/HTTPS) or transport (TCP/SSL) layer

This material will be focused only on the Application Load Balancer which is used for most of the use cases.

### Application Load Balancer (ALB)

The service can be found at Services > Compute > EC2 > Load Balancing > Load Balancers > Create Load Balancer > ALB

An ALB can serve as a single point of contact for clients and distribute traffic across multiple targets, such as EC2 Instances, in multiple Availability Zones. When creating an ALB you will have to chose from 2 different types and in which Availability Zones your LB will be available:

- internet-facing: routes requests from public internet to targets
- internal: routes requests only from clients to targets using private IP addresses

Basically an ALB has two main components: listeners and target groups.

```Load balancers are included on the AWS free-tier. However, please remember to delete any unused resources to avoid any costs```

> #### listeners

Reviewer 2: ANy reason to have those sections lower case?

Author: it's just being used as bold, no need to be a section on the appendix

A listener tries to match requests from clients based on, among many types, protocol/port and path-based routing. For example a request on port `443` can redirect the traffic to an internal server running on port `80` or a request to `/admin` sends the traffic to a specifc EC2 Instance.

> Each listener rule consists in a priority of actions and one or more conditions. When the conditions for a rule are met, the traffic is then forwarded to a target group.

Reviewer 2: Each listener rule consists in a priority of actions and one or more conditions. When the conditions for a rule are met, the traffic is then forwarded to a target group and the remaining rules are ignored.

> #### target group

Reviewer 2: same lower case question.

Target groups send requests to one EC2, an ASG and others. Healthchecks can be used to check whether the service is up and running and can start receiving traffic from the load balancer.

Those healthchecks can also be linked to an ASG to send termination requests if the instance is not working correctly.

![alb](/classes/03class/aws/assets/alb.png)

> #### AWS Certificate Manager

Reviewer: Appendix?

> If your service is being exposed through an ALB on port 443, a SSL certificate will need to be attached to the listener, otherwise when your clients try to access your webserver, their browser will complain about the connection not being safe.

Reviewer 2: If your service is being exposed through an ALB using HTTPS protocol on port 443, ....

I don't think you can even create a  ALB using HTTPS protocol without specifying a SSL certificate.

> AWS offers a service for generating SSL certificates for free if you are using with their managed services like a load balancer.

Reviewer 2: AWS offers a service for generating SSL certificates for free if you are using within AWS managed services like a load balancer.

Read more about AWS ACM and SSL certificates [here](https://aws.amazon.com/certificate-manager/getting-started/?nc=sn&loc=7)

## Route53

> R53 is the DNS managed service offered by AWS. To consume this service you first will need to create either private or public hosted zones.

Reviewer 2: Route 53 (R53) is the DNS managed service offered by AWS. To consume this service you first need to create either a private or a public hosted zones.

- public hosted zone: can be public accessible. You will need to own a domain and point the `ns` records to the zone created to be managed by AWS.
- private hosted zone: will only be resolved by local workloads running on your VPC.

Unfortunately this is not included on the AWS free-tier. However the cost is only $1AUD/month per hosted zone.

If you wish to try a public hosted zone, you can generate a free domain at `http://www.dot.tk/en/index.html?lang=en`, create a public hosted zone with the same name as your domain and follow the directions to create the `ns` records and managed your new domain through Route53.

> 

Reviewer: Include different types of targets R53 can handle, including ALB alias and some basic routing options.

Reviewer 2: I reckon you should also should mention record types or have a link to an article explaining the most common ones(at least A and CNAME). Even having the link in the appendix, it's good to mention it on this section and reference the link below

#### ALB DNS

Once you create an ALB, a random public Amazon DNS string will be provided so you can access your service. This DNS will not be friendly and should not be shared with your clients.

It will look something like `default-173007695.us-east-1.elb.amazonaws.com.`

> Ideally you would create a `CNAME` record to point this aws random string to a friendly name on your dns `mywebsite.myowndomain.tk`.

Reviewer 2: You haven't mentioned what a record is neither what is CNAME, so might be confusing for someone with no previous experience with DNS.
